A few minutes ago, we discussed how classic machine-learning involves the development of
specific features that an algorithm developer deems
important for classifying images of certain classes.
We discussed how radiologists are sometimes brought into the mix because they can offer
their expertise of what they know is important
from looking at tens of thousands of images.
The creation of the convolutional neural network architecture was inspired by
this idea that humans learn complex features
of images by being exposed to thousands of examples.
So its architecture was designed to mirror the human visual cortex in the brain.
The boxes labeled in the figure each represent a layer of the visual cortex.
Cells in the first layer, V1,
have receptive fields that correspond to very small areas of the physical world.
Several of these cells then feed into a single V2 cell,
which in turn has information from a slightly larger area of the physical world.
As receptive fields get larger and higher layers,
each layer becomes responsible for detecting
more complex features about the visual world until finally at the last layer,
distinct faces and objects can be recognized.
This figure shows a typical CNN architecture.
First, there's an actual image that is fed into the network.
There is then a set of convolutional layers in
black that can be likened to those of V1 cells in the human brain.
They are made up of a set of filters that are looking for very simple features,
such as a directional line.
Note that the input image here has a size of 224 by
224 that matches the first set of convolutional layers.
This first set of filter layers is then down
sampled so that filters in the second set of convolutional layers
have a larger receptive fields and can
therefore distinguish more complex features like shapes.
This continues as sets of layers which are
down-sampled and fed into higher level layers that can
detect more complex features such as objects and finally specific faces.
When we train a CNN,
we are training the parameters of each filter in each layer
to recognize what's important about the images that we are interested in.
We'll talk about these layers in more depth later in the lesson.
Unlike classification algorithms that typically employ a CNN,
one of the most common architectures for segmentation is a UNet.
You will learn more about these in the 3D imaging course.
It's important to note though that a limitation of
2D imaging is the inability to measure the volume of structures,
which is often more clinically relevant than the area.
If you think about it,
when a patient gets an x-ray taken,
the angle at which their body is positioned with respect to the x-ray machine can have
a big impact on how the area of a given structure appears in a 2D image.
Using the area in 2D medical imaging as
a reliable clinical measure may be limited in its utility.